# PA2: GrumpyVM

Your job in this assignment is to implement a program `vm` that executes GrumpyVM programs represented in bytecode. That is, `vm` takes programs output by your assembler from PA1 and executes them to produce the result of the corresponding program.

```
                /-------------\                    /--------------\
<filename.s> => | assemble.rs | => <filename.o> => |     vm       | => program's result
                \-------------/                    \--------------/
                  ^| PA1                                 ^| This assignment
```

There are two main problems to solve. 

1. Parsing GrumpyVM bytecode into an internal data structure (of your design)
2. Executing the resulting program. 

As in PA1, your main reference is the [GrumpyVM documentation](../doc/vm.md), which describes in detail the effect of each instruction on the GrumpyVM.

At a high level, the GrumpyVM operates over:

* A flag `halt` indicating whether the machine has halted
* A register `pc` containing the current program counter, a `u32`
* A register `fp` containing the current frame pointer, a `u32`
* A stack of values `Val`, with maximum size `STACK_SIZE` 
* A heap of values `Val`, with maximum size `HEAP_SIZE`
* The program to be executed, `program`, a list of instructions.

The `pc` points to the instruction to be executed next. The `fp` register points to the location in the stack from which function local variables are loaded and stored (via an offset calculation `fp + i`; see the GrumpyVM documentation for details). Values `Val` are defined as in the GrumpyVM documentation. For the purposes of this assignment, you may assume that `STACK_SIZE` and `HEAP_SIZE` are both equal 1024 bytes. 

A peculiarity of GrumpyVM is that, unlike most real computers, GrumpyVM's `stack` grows upward from smaller to larger addresses (stacks traditionally grow downward, to lower addresses).

## Example 1: `push`

As an example of how the VM executes an instruction, consider what happens on `push 3`. Schematically, the state of the VM before `push 3` is:

| halt | pc | fp | stack | heap | program |
| ---- | -- | -- | ----- | ---- | ------- |
| false | i | ... | ... v2 v1 STACK_TOP | ... | ... push 3 ... | 
|       |   |     |                     |     | ... ^i'th instruction ... |

After `push 3`, we get the following VM state

| halt | pc | fp | stack | heap | program |
| ---- | -- | -- | ----- | ---- | ------- |
| false | i+1 | ... | ... v2 v1 Vi32(3) STACK_TOP | ... | ... push 3 ... | 
|       |     |     |                             |     | ... ^i'th instruction ... |

in which the `pc` has been incremented by 1 (to point to the next instruction in the program) and the 32-bit signed integer `3` has been pushed onto the stack. In a bit more detail, the VM's `mainloop` performs the following steps in order:

1. Check whether `halt == true`; if so, exit `mainloop`.
2. Increment the `pc`.
3. Check whether `pc - 1` is greater than or equal to the program length; if so, raise an error.
4. Execute the instruction at address `pc - 1`.
5. Increment `counter`.
6. Loop to 1.

Importantly, note that the `pc` register is incremented to point to the following instruction before the current instruction (at `pc - 1`) is executed. This may be relevant to your implementation of control-flow instructions like `call`. 

## Example 2: `call`

Consider, as a second example, how GrumpyVM's state changes when a `call` instruction is executed. 

Before the call, the state looks like:

| halt | pc | fp | stack | heap | program |
| ---- | -- | -- | ----- | ---- | ------- |
| false | i | cur_fp | ... varg1 varg2 ... vargN Vloc(caller_fp) Vloc(target) STACK_TOP | ... | ... call ... | 
|       |   |        | ... ^cur_fp                                                      |     | ... ^i'th instruction ... |

The `call` expects the arguments to be on the stack beginning at address `cur_fp`, followed by two locations: `caller_fp`, the saved frame pointer of the caller, and `target`, the address of the function to be called.

After the call, the state looks like:

| halt | pc | fp | stack | heap | program |
| ---- | -- | -- | ----- | ---- | ------- |
| false | target | cur_fp | ... varg1 varg2 ... vargN Vloc(caller_fp) Vloc(i+1) STACK_TOP | ... | ... call ... | 
|       |        |        | ... ^cur_fp                                                   |     | ... ^i'th instruction ... |

1. `target` has been popped.
2. `pc` has been set to `target`.
3. The location `i+1` (pointing to the instruction right after the `call`) has been pushed onto the stack; this is the address to which the function will return when it executes a `ret`. 

## Specifics

Specifically, your tasks in this assignment are to:

1. Post a novel test case Grumpy assembly program to Piazza. Especially good is a program that exercises an obscure corner case of the GrumpyVM.

2. Implement a program `vm` that reads and executes GrumpyVM bytecode files `<filename.o>` according to the GrumpyVM specification given in [GrumpyVM documentation](../doc/vm.md). You may assume that `<filename>.o` is your program's first argument (the zeroth being your program's path in the file system). As described below, your program should write its result to `stdout`.

3. You must use one of the following languages to implement `vm`: Rust, C, C++, Python, OCaml. In order for us to support submissions in multiple languages, we ask that *all* submissions contain at least the following three files:
   
   ```
   README               <-- A short text document describing your project's architecture
   Makefile             <-- The Makefile used to build your project
   main.<rs|c|cc|py|ml> <-- Your project's root file
   ```
   
   NOTES:
   * Your Makefile should contain the following targets:
      - `build` which will build your vm (it doesn't need to do anything for Python but must still exist).
      - `run` which will run your vm. It should be called like this `F=<file.o> make run`.
      - `clean` which will clean the build environment
   * We will build your project on `pu2.cs.ohio.edu` (we suggest you test there).
   * You may (optionally) include additional files that are called from `main`.
   * If you use Rust you may use Cargo, however you still need to provide the above Makefile.
      - Hint: Look at `cargo build --release`, it will use optimizations and remove debug symbols so it runs faster.
   * Sample Makefiles for C++ and Rust will be uploaded to Blackboard for you to use.
   
 4. To submit your project, submit all your project files separately in Blackboard, under assignment `pa2`, on or before the due date.

### Details: 

* On errors, your program should exit with a nonzero exit code.

* When it successfully executes a `.o` file, your program should exit with error code 0.

* Your `vm` should print the result of each program it executes on `stdout`.

* When printing the result of a GrumpyVM program to `stdout`, use the following serialization scheme: 

| Value Type | Encoding |
| ---------- | -------- |
| The unit value | `Vunit` |
| An `i32` value `n` | `Vi32(n)`, where `n` is a string encoding of the integer, e.g., `-345` |
| `false` | `Vbool(false)` |
| `true` | `Vbool(true)` |
| The undefined value | `Vundef` |

The other value types `Vsize` and `Vaddr` are used internally by the GrumpyVM but do not appear in programs and will not appear as the results of programs; you therefore do not need to serialize them (instead report an error).

### Testing 

The `pa/tests` directory contains a number of programs that you can use to test your VM implementation. In particular, for each object file `<filename>.o` there is a corresponding file `<filename>.expected` that contains the expected output of your VM when run on `<filename>.o`. We will use these test cases (and perhaps others) to test your code after you submit.

## Language Choice

As described above, you are allowed to use one of a number of languages (Rust, C, C++, Python, OCaml) to implement your VM. Be aware, however, that [PA3](3.md) will require you to extend your VM to support garbage collection and perhaps also concurrency. The easiest path is therefore to implement **PA2** and **PA3** in the same language, so choose wisely! 

## Pair Programming

Unlike in previous assignments, you are permitted (though not required) to work with up to one other person on this assignment. Note that: 

1. Pair programming doesn't mean evenly dividing the work to be done independently by the two students. If you work with someone else, you should both actively be building your solution, preferably by pair programming at the same computer.

2. Only one member of a team need submit. Make sure, in your `README`, to list both team members.

3. We additionally ask that in your `README` you briefly describe the contributions made by each team member (one to two sentences per team member).

## Performance (Extra Credit) 

Time permitting, we may test the performance of your VM implementation relative to our own implementation and against those of other students. We plan to give a small amount of extra credit to those students or pairs (perhaps the top 3) who implement the fastest VMs. Note, however, that you cannot win the performance contest if your VM has correctness bugs (faithfully implementing all the instructions in [GrumpyVM documentation](../doc/vm.md) is far more important than optimizing for speed).
